I really believe that this understanding of philosophy,
epistemology in particular, what is knowledge?
How do we know anything, the importance of concepts
and how do we form concepts?
I mean, concepts, abstract concepts are the key
to human intelligence.
But again, it's understanding intelligence,
understanding cognition has to be a prerequisite
for building artificial intelligence.
Hello, and welcome to the 68th episode of New Human Podcast
at Magabahari Edicologist on Twitter and Instagram.
And you can follow this show on liveinlimbo.com,
iTunes, YouTube and BitChute.
And today with me, I have a pleasure of having Peter Vos.
Welcome to New Human Podcast, Peter.
Thank you, thanks for inviting me.
Yeah, you were the first ever recommended guest
to come on New Human Podcast by my dear friend,
David McFadden, who I believe used to work for you.
Yeah, absolutely, yes, right.
It only took us 68 episodes to get to you,
but I think this is a good place and good time
to talk about a lot of different things
in the context of intelligence and artificial intelligence.
But let's start with your background,
the work you've done, the lives you've lived
and what are you mainly focused on now these days?
Okay, sure, yeah, let me give you a rundown.
So I actually didn't finish high school.
So, you know, personal circumstances,
I started work at 16, talked myself electronics,
became an electronics engineer,
started my own electronics company.
Then I fell in love with software, you know,
instant gratification, you have an idea
and you can sit down for a few hours
and you've got something that's working.
As opposed to electronics, you know,
usually it takes a long time to build something.
Anyway, so I've really been involved with, you know,
software and programming for a long time now.
I've built several technology platforms,
including database engines and programming languages.
I also built an ERP software system,
built a company around that.
That became very successful.
We went from the garage to 400 people,
did an IPO.
So that was super exciting, love to do that again.
So it's when I exited that company,
I had enough time and money on my hands to say,
what do I, you know, what big project do I want to tackle?
And, you know, the obvious thing for me was
how can we build software
or can we make software more intelligent?
How can we build machines that can think and learn
and reason the way humans do?
So I took five years to study cognition, intelligence,
actually much broader than that.
Even, you know, epistemology, theory of knowledge,
different aspects of philosophy, ethics,
and, you know, how do children learn?
What do IQ tests measure?
How is our intelligence different from animals?
All of those different aspects.
I really deeply understand
what cognition and intelligence is.
And during that period,
I basically came up with a design
for an intelligence engine.
So in 2001, I got together with some other people.
We actually coined the term
artificial general intelligence, AGI, in 2001,
wrote a book on the topic.
And that's when I started my first AI company,
hired about 12 people.
David was one of our early contributors.
And basically for several years, we were in R&D mode,
taking my ideas and turning them into various prototypes,
experimenting around,
building sort of animal models of intelligence,
you know, children, how children learn.
And then eventually, over the years,
we developed a platform that we could commercialize.
In 2008, we then launched a commercial company
to use our technology to make call center,
automated call center calls more pleasant
and more intelligent, you know.
At the moment, when you call into a company
and you talk to a robot, people just hate that.
Yeah.
You know, press zero to get to an operator
because they're so awful.
So in smart action, we offer basically a much better system,
something that you can speak to in normal English,
remembers what you said earlier in the conversation.
So it's just a better, you know, better experience.
However, I found that running that company,
I got bogged down with, you know,
scalability, reliability, security issues,
you know, normal engineering issues
that were really taking up all of my time,
HIPAA compliance, PCI compliance,
all of those kinds of things.
So I exited the company seven years ago
to concentrate on getting back to cranking up
the intelligence to take it, you know, to the next level.
And that's when I formed the current company,
iGo.ai, again, hired a team of about 12 people.
And for several years, we were in stealth mode,
no customers, just concentrating on the core technology
and making it more intelligent.
Because human level intelligence is just, you know,
it's a really, really hard problem to solve
with current hardware and software technology that we have.
So we're still quite a long way away
from being at human level,
but the idea is to have the right fundamental architecture,
to have the fundamentally right approach
that allows you to keep getting smarter
and smarter systems, you know.
So that's what we've been concentrating on.
And then about, well, last year,
we actually then commercialized our second,
started commercializing our second generation
of the technology.
And we're just in the midst now of,
we signed up some great customers
and we, you know, now fully commercial again.
But this time around, I want to make sure
that while we pursue our commercial expansion,
we continue actually also keeping a strong development team
so that we don't get trapped, you know,
just putting all of our energy into the commercial business
and not really continuing to work on, you know,
increasing, getting closer and closer to human level.
Would it make the software available as open source
would in a way solve that problem
that you can have contributors from all around the world?
Yeah, we've certainly thought about that.
There are a number of challenges in that, you know,
we've seen, for example, Ben Goetzel's project, OpenCog.
And it's actually very hard to get people to work
on an AGI project open source
because it's a really long-term kind of thing.
It's not easily divisible.
And it requires, well, certainly in our approach,
I found that, you know, most of the people we have
on the team now have been with us three, four, five years.
And it really takes a long time to get your head
around this different approach
that we have a cognitive architecture to, you know,
to really learn the difficulties, the complexities
of working with the system.
So you really need to be dedicated to it full-time
and have a long-term view
or have somebody pay your bills, you know.
And the other thing I found is very difficult
to do it remotely, again, because we have a lot of,
every day we have brainstorming sessions, you know,
in terms of how do we solve this problem?
And it's, I'm not, I don't think it's impossible
to do it remotely, but it's just very hard, I think.
Of course, right now, you know, this week,
we have everyone working from home
and we don't know how long that's gonna last,
but it's definitely impacting communication
and productivity, you know, in some way.
So they are constraints.
And then of course, the other thing with open source,
you really make it that much more difficult
to attract funding for a project.
And, you know, clearly this is a long-term project
that will require more funding.
I've been funding it from, you know,
basically my previous endeavors,
but, you know, my pockets are only so deep, you know.
So, you know, I've been able to afford to have 12 people,
but, you know, you're not gonna solve human level AGI
with 12 people, I don't think.
So, you know, it's attracting investment,
building a commercial company and all of that.
And plus all the other reasons I mentioned,
I don't think that open source is feasible.
Now, having said that, we did actually very seriously
investigate the year before last, you know,
going the blockchain route, obviously when that was,
you know, all the fashion and people were raising
a lot of money with that way.
So, I think there is a viable path
once we get to a certain level of funding and size
that similar to Wikipedia, we could have, you know,
a set of contributors that are domain experts,
you know, in how to help people manage stress
or, you know, teach mathematics or whatever it might be,
where they could then teach our AI, our IGO,
they could teach IGO how to do these things.
So, you would have, like Wikipedia,
basically lots of contributors contributing
to the central knowledge base.
Now, of course, with the blockchain idea,
the whole thing was that contributors would then get paid,
you know, in tokens and IGO tokens
for whoever uses that particular skill that they taught IGO.
But that effort would still have taken quite a bit of money
to build the infrastructure, the platform,
to a point where people can make
those kinds of contributions, you know,
and we're not there yet.
Our tools and documentation and the infrastructure
really isn't at a place where we could have
thousands or tens of thousands of people,
you know, teaching our system additional things.
But that is ultimately a path that, you know,
we may well get back to, I hope we can get back to.
Yeah, I was going to ask, because as far as I understand,
Ben Goertzel's argument for Singularity Net,
which is a decentralized blockchain-oriented platform
for artificial intelligence, is to create the AGI,
ultimately, as a result of millions and millions
of narrow AIs that are not owned
by any central structure of authority.
And that seems to be the biggest danger for us right now
going into this, who knows what kind of a decade
this is going to be on the back of technological progress.
But the idea that, let's say, the Chinese Communist Party
is going to own the most powerful AI,
or Google, or the US government,
it's a terrifying kind of prospect.
Right, yeah, there are many things, you know,
from what you mentioned.
So, first of all, all of my research
indicates very strongly that a collection
of narrow AIs will never be AGI.
Oh, okay, so this is a different,
fundamentally different route than Ben Goertzel's,
with Singularity Net, okay.
Correct, I don't believe it's possible.
It's sort of, you know, somewhere,
I mean, it's obviously not a simple debate,
and, you know, Ben's a smart guy,
and I don't know how much he believes
that the society of, you know, open AI,
or whether it's just kind of what makes sense
to have right now, to do right now,
because he actually had a much more highly integrated,
his approach was actually much more similar
to ours originally with OpenCog,
that basically there was a central system,
that knowledge graph that had all of the skills,
you know, sort of in a tightly coupled,
highly integrated manner,
whereas if you have thousands of different AI developers
developing little narrow AIs,
you know, how do they communicate?
How do you decide, you know, what,
well, basically, I just, I'm convinced
that that's not gonna lead to AGI.
So, that's the one thing, so I think fundamentally,
I mean, it may be good to have a marketplace
for AGI algorithms, but then you're competing
with, you know, Microsoft, and IBM, and Google,
who already have these APIs
where they're providing, you know, narrow AI APIs,
basically, you know, microservices.
So, I don't, yeah, I haven't studied, you know,
the current system enough to see what benefits
it could provide, but certainly,
I don't think it's the right path to AGI.
Now, as far as a single government also having AGI,
AGI, it's a fairly complex argument,
and, you know, we don't really know enough
about the dynamics of AI.
You get, for example, you get OpenAI,
where the CEO of OpenAI made a strong statement
where he says, all we need is more data
and more processing power, and, you know,
I guess that's how they got a billion dollars
from Microsoft, or, well, I don't know how much
of it they got, because most of that money,
I think, will go right back to Microsoft
as basically credits for that.
And apparently, it's only a commercial wing of it,
the whole thing's supposed to be non-profit.
Yeah, yeah, so, you know, a lot of question marks there,
but, yeah, I'm sure a lot of that billion dollars
is actually just credits for Microsoft cloud services,
but be that as it may, the point that I really want
to make here is that he firmly believes,
or at least firmly states, that all we need for AGI
is more data and more processing power.
I think it's completely, utterly wrong.
You know, it's sort of the argument of having,
if a million monkeys can't write Shakespeare,
a billion monkeys aren't gonna write Shakespeare either.
You know, obviously, again, they're subtle arguments,
you know, and so on, but I firmly believe
for a number of reasons, and I've written quite a lot
about this on medium.com, I have a lot of articles
of why the current deep learning, machine learning approach
cannot lead to artificial general intelligence
or real intelligence.
It's fundamentally a dead end, it's a wrong path.
So throwing more data and more processing power
is not gonna solve the problem.
So if you believe that more data and more processing power
will solve the problem, then, of course,
it's much more concerning that a government
would basically have, you know, the most powerful AI.
I don't believe that.
I believe the, there is, I'm not saying
that processing power ultimately isn't going to be important,
but I also believe there will probably be an optimum size
of processor beyond which you really want to decentralize.
You want to have, you know, multiple AIs.
So, you know, it's sort of similar saying,
instead of having a thousand smart PhD level people
working on a problem, you just want one Einstein
with an IQ of a thousand.
And I think there are trade-offs.
Obviously, you want the highest level of IQ,
but above a certain level, your increased IQ
is probably less important than the diversity of approaches
that are, you know, that are being tried,
sort of having a community of AIs
that can chip away at different problems.
Now, if the right architecture for AGI
becomes generally available,
I think it will actually be feasible for, you know,
a much wider range of institutions and companies
and individuals to have AGI
so that it won't be as centralized.
So that's one reason why I'm less concerned
about this sort of winner-take-all scenario.
But there's another much more controversial thesis
sort of that I have.
And that is that I believe increased intelligence
will actually lead to improved morality.
Why is it controversial?
Well, pretty much every time I say that, people will say,
wasn't Hitler very smart?
Or, you know, some comment like that, you know?
Oh my God.
So I think that, you know, if politicians got AIs
as advisors, I think they would actually
make better decisions, you know, less evil decisions.
Because they would, you know,
and the example I often give is in terms of
things we do that are really bad or immoral
that turn out to be, no, well,
maybe that wasn't the best thing to do.
A good example here is with today,
I think most people would agree,
America, you know, how America responded to 9-11
instead of, you know, just zooming down on Afghanistan
and, you know, invading Iraq.
Maybe it wasn't the best thing to do, the smartest thing.
And sort of what are the limitations in humans?
Why do we do things that are wrong or bad or immoral,
you know, that are basically detrimental to us?
Well, there are three reasons.
I mean, there are probably more of them,
but three major reasons.
The one is we tend to respond emotionally, you know,
with 9-11, well, we've got to hit out.
We've got to hit out at somebody, you know,
somebody that falls, we've got to get back at somebody.
So it's that emotional response,
which is not always the best thing.
The second thing is we don't really work
with adequate information.
You know, we don't, it's not easy for us
to get right information.
We don't have the patience, we're not very good at it.
Whereas, you know, an AI will be able to have much better,
work with much better information, you know.
Were they really weapons of mass destruction?
Well, I think with a little bit of research,
it wouldn't have been that difficult to figure out,
no, that wasn't an issue, that was just an excuse.
And then the third thing we're related to that
is we are just not very good at rational thinking.
You know, evolution didn't really equip us to, you know,
yes, we are the rational animal relative to animals,
we're rational, but relative to what rationality
could and, you know, should and could be,
we're not actually very good at that.
So if you have an AI advisor that over time
has proven itself to give you good advice,
you know, as an individual, as a politician, as a whatever,
and it, you know, it would then say, well, you know,
hang on, just wait a minute here.
What is the best way to respond to 9-11 thing?
You know, maybe there's a better way
of achieving your objectives.
What are you actually trying to achieve?
You know, maybe there's a better way
of achieving your objectives than invading Iraq
and, you know, sending all your troops to Afghanistan.
So I actually firmly believe that having this
highly intelligent, rational advisor,
objective advisor, will actually make people
make better decisions and basically be,
become more moral because the two are related.
Now, just off the top of my head,
I can think of two arguments against what you said.
One would be what Elon Musk is saying,
that you ask an AI to, for example, get rid of germs,
and the best solution it will come up with
is that to get rid of humans, all of them together,
and there will be no germs.
So that's one thing.
The second thing is, what is the scale for us
to evaluate these terms like better, worse, right or wrong,
especially when we are dealing with
a different type of intelligence,
that the argument is that the alignment issue
will remain our biggest challenge,
that we don't know that the goals we have as humanity,
which itself is debatable,
have we agreed upon certain set of goals
that we are pursuing?
Are they gonna be shared by AI, and if not,
is there any way for us to be able to co-exist
rather than merging with it?
Yeah, so yeah, I love these questions.
Obviously, those are the obvious objections.
So the first one you mentioned
is sort of the paperclip argument, you know,
is that, which I think is a pathetic argument,
quite frankly, and I'm appalled
that so many smart people have fallen into that.
So it's basically the argument boils down to,
you have this super intelligence
that's so smart that it can outfox the whole of humanity,
you know, and pave over the world with paperclips
or whatever, you know, or wipe out humans,
and we can't stop it.
So that's how smart it is.
It can outsmart all of us combined.
Yet, it's not smart enough to figure out
that that's not really what you wanted it to do.
I mean, it makes no sense.
Any AI that we build, one of the first things we do,
and I mean, we do that right now with IGO,
one of the most important things is you want your AI
to understand what you want it to do.
And that's an iterative process.
You know, it's not a line of code that you say,
I want paperclips or, you know, kill all viruses, you know.
It's, you know, and I think it's,
you have too many mathematicians and programmers
basically involved in this field of AI safety
that have really no relationship to cognitive psychology
or even common sense or philosophy.
That's not how you're gonna build an AI,
that you're gonna be hard coding, you know,
fruit shoe lines of code, you know,
I want paperclips or, you know, give it.
It has to have a whole lot of common sense,
knowledge, reasoning ability, background
for it to do anything useful for you, you know.
So it has to, one of the things it has to be able to do
is to figure out, to ask you to interact with you.
I mean, it's like hiring somebody, you know,
hiring somebody, would you hire a contractor
and give them a billion dollars and say,
hey, build me a house, you know.
And, you know, okay, you're not telling them
where you want it or why you want it,
what you wanna do with it or what constraints there are.
And, you know, if the contractor doesn't ask you
and you just says, okay, I'll take your billion dollars,
I'll build your house, you know.
Right, but the contractor is working for you
to get that billion dollars.
What is the incentive for the AI to do
what you want it to do rather than just pursue its own goals?
Which goes back to the alignment issue.
Yeah, okay, so yeah, that's,
well, that's the other thing.
Well, I think the problem there is that people assume
that the AI will have an agenda of its own.
It won't.
The fundamental agendas we have are basically
from our reptile brain, you know,
it's basically to, you know, our selfish gene,
to further our selfish gene or to rape and pillage,
you know, to, you know, that's really what drives us
and this is why we have egos and, you know,
and all of those good things.
Now, there's no reason that we would build an AI
that would have a reptile brain.
I mean, there may be some researchers say, yeah,
I want an AI that is just as irrational as humans are,
you know, so I'll give it a reptile brain.
But that would actually be, first of all,
not many people would do that
because, you know, you're commercially driven,
you don't want the thing to turn around and bite you.
So, but, you know, first of all,
there'd be very few of those instances
where somebody actually builds one.
So you have a lot more good cops and bad cops in that regard.
But secondly, they're gonna be much less efficient
because they're gonna suffer irrationalities
that they're going to, you know,
act out of their reptile brain responses
and they're not gonna,
they're gonna be less effective, basically.
So, no, AIs are not going to inherently
have their own agenda.
They will be built specifically
to do what we want them to do.
I mean, that's what we building
and that's, you know, the hardest thing to get the thing.
Not that it wants to do its own thing.
It's just, you know, the most likely failure scenario
by far by orders of magnitude
is that the thing won't work properly.
It'll have a bug and crash and be stupid.
That's a much, much harder problem.
You know, people just,
a lot of these sort of AI safety experts
assume that getting intelligence will be the easy part
and that alignment will be the hard part.
No, no, it's exactly the opposite way around.
Getting to AI,
getting an AI that actually understands,
that can learn, that can reason,
that's the hard part.
And in building such a system
that can actually do useful things for us,
an inherent byproduct, an essential byproduct,
prerequisite, I think I should say,
is that it actually understands what you want.
And no, it's not gonna have an agenda of its own.
There'd be no reason that it would have that.
Is DeepMind closer to your perspective?
Because my understanding is that their mission statement
is solve intelligence and then solve everything
as a consequence of it.
Yeah, I totally agree with their mission statement.
I wish I had their resources.
I think they're fundamentally on the wrong track
with deep learning, machine learning.
And I think they already acknowledged that.
Dan Misosabe, if you listen to his presentations
that he gives, he says,
we have deep learning as this problem, this problem,
this problem, this problem.
These are the problems we need to solve
in order to get intelligence.
And I haven't heard him really give any answers
that he has any answers,
just that we need to keep chipping away at it.
And I think it seems that they're also spending a lot of,
putting a lot of effort into understanding
how the brain works to try and find answers
to those problems.
Now, I think they're looking under the wrong tree
or bush or whatever.
I think because of the success they've had
with deep learning, machine learning
in those narrow applications,
obviously being able to beat the world gold champion
is phenomenal.
Who would have thought 10 years ago
that we'd be able to do that?
That was kind of an unsolved AI problem.
But all the problems they've been tackling
are narrow AI problems.
And they don't fundamentally address
the requirements of intelligence.
And, but they've got 600 or whatever PhD level people
that are experts at mathematics, statistics,
machine learning, deep learning, data science and so on.
Those are not the right skills to solve intelligence.
You first have to understand what cognition is.
So you really need to be a cognitive psychologist
to first understand what intelligence is,
what it entails.
Not some mathematical sort of formulation of intelligence
which is kind of the approach they have.
And then you need to say, well, once we have a list
of what are the essentials that intelligence requires,
then your research needs to be focused.
Your development needs to be focused
on addressing those problems
and not addressing problems that will maybe impressive,
impress people and maybe some breakthrough in AI
or maybe some AI benchmark or so.
Because what everybody in AI is doing is narrow AI.
So putting more effort into getting better at narrow AI
isn't gonna help you build AGI.
Right, you're just gonna have
better narrow AIs basically.
Correct, yeah.
Now, obviously based on what you were saying,
this is an incredibly complex kind of a problem
and approaching it is very important
to how it's being approached.
As you said, 600 PhD,
it's not enough necessarily to fix the problem.
I wanna read some headlines,
all of them following the same topic.
These are what people are getting their image of AI based on
and get your reaction.
Guardian has said,
disastrous lack of diversity in AI industry
perpetuates bias based on a study.
Fortune has said,
how to fix artificial intelligence's diversity crisis.
I did not know that we have diversity crisis
in artificial intelligence.
AI authority, five ways artificial intelligence
bring diversity to the modern workplace.
MIT, using artificial intelligence to promote diversity.
IBM has a paper,
the role of AI in mitigating bias
to enhance diversity and inclusion.
There is a think tank called diversity.ai,
a think tank for inclusive artificial intelligence.
And Wired has a magazine that AI is the future,
but where are the women?
And making the argument that just 12%
of machine learning researchers are women,
a worrying statistic for a field
supposedly reshaping society.
Are these really what we need to focus on?
And aren't these just a waste of resources
and really educating the people?
Because at the end of the day,
all of these technology work
as well as the society that adopts it.
Yeah, sorry, I've got a phone ringing.
It's all good.
Okay, no more.
All right.
So, yeah, I mean,
they're obviously the kind of things that,
sort of moral posturing,
that people can say,
how terrible is this and how terrible is that?
Well, I can tell you when,
I mean, first of all,
we have a lot of women on our team
who are excellent cognitive psychologists.
We call them AI psychologists,
who are linguists and cognitive psychologists
who do a fantastic job.
And I assume they were not hired
because they were women.
Not at all.
Yeah, exactly.
They were hired because they were the best candidates.
And so,
there's such a shortage of talent
in the deep learning, machine learning field.
I very much doubt that there's a huge barrier
for women getting into the field.
Now, are there problems in terms of management structures
and old boys clubs and
sexual harassment and so on?
Absolutely, there are problems,
but they're not unique to AI or machine learning.
In fact, I think they probably much less
than in other more established industries.
So, that's kind of the one thing.
Now, as far as bias in algorithms is concerned,
well, yes, of course,
if the data you're feeding into the system
is from a certain demographic
or has certain whatever incarceration,
if the wrong people were incarcerated
and that's what you train the system with,
yeah, it's gonna be wrong.
But to me, that's an engineering problem.
It's basically, the algorithm isn't working
the way it should be working and you need to fix it.
It's not like big moral thing that deep learning is bad.
It's like whether you have an expert system,
whether you have a manual system
that people go through a checklist of
who to give credit for, who to lock up or whatever.
It's a bug in the system and you should fix the bug.
It just seems that it's judging ethics and morale,
judging something that is beyond ethics and morality
using ethics and morality.
And I think this is important also to talk about,
you said our ethics and morality in large part
is coming from our lizard brain.
One of the questions that I keep asking technologists,
philosophers, thinkers who I have in this show,
whether or not ethics and reality are objective
or subjective to begin with.
And if they're not objective,
then how are we gonna pin it down to something
that we can implement within the machine?
Right, right.
Well, in fact, yes, I guess that's the other part
of the question you asked me earlier
in terms of what morality do we imbue our system with,
with the alignment problem and because different people.
And yes, I find that absolutely shocking
that tens of millions of dollars
or maybe hundreds of millions by now
are going to AI safety type of organizations and so on.
And I've had quite a bit of contact with them,
the conferences and so on.
And you ask these people, okay, what is morality?
Can you define it?
How do you actually decide right from wrong?
And they're completely silent.
They're completely stumped by that question.
So here they're talking about
we have to program our system with morality,
which makes no sense to me anyway,
that you can program it.
But even if you could,
what morality, if you don't believe morality
is something objective,
then what are you fighting for even?
What's the basis of your whole organization
in terms of what, if you can't define what's good
and what's bad, now, I do firmly believe
that morality should be, is and should be,
could be objective, that the right morality is objective.
And again, I have some fairly long articles on medium.com
about that, and it's, you know,
you basically have to say, why do we need morality?
What is the purpose of having morality in the first place?
And that kind of immediately gives you the goal.
The reason we have morality is, or should be,
not that we go to heaven or that we conform
to some dictator, but that we optimize
individual human life, that we optimize flourishing.
And then you can debate, you know,
is it the greatest good for the greatest number or so?
And I think there are very good arguments why no,
it should be individual flourishing rather than,
you know, aggregate flourishing,
because if you can have a system
where each individual can optimize their flourishing,
that includes the community that you're part of as a whole.
I mean, these are not arguments, you know,
one can get through in a few sentences,
but that's sort of the conclusion I've reached.
So if human flourishing is the goal,
the purpose we have morality or why we should have morality,
then it actually becomes objective,
because you can say, well, what is involved in flourishing?
And flourishing is, well, the obvious thing is,
you want good physical health, you know,
that's part of flourishing.
You want mental health, you know, well-being
and emotional well-being.
And then, of course, also sort of material well-being
as part of it. Resources, right.
Yeah, resources.
So once you have that, and now the details of what,
you know, exactly what resources might be important
or what kind of life somebody wants to lead,
you know, there's very specifics,
but there's actually a lot of overlap in what flourishing is.
There are a lot of things you can subtract.
Basically, if you are ill, physically ill,
well, that's not optimal.
So, you know, that you can, and mentally as well,
if you are distressed, if you are depressed
or, you know, just not able to think clearly or properly,
then that's negative.
So we kind of know what the negatives are, you know,
where non-flourishing is.
And then you can basically build, you can figure out
what are the principles that you need to live by.
And those are basically your moral principles,
which you then automatize.
As you practice them, you automatize,
and they become your virtues, your characteristics
of what you normally do.
So to give an example, you know,
is lying a good thing in principle, you know,
or is being truthful basically beneficial
to achieve on average, you know,
not in every particular instance, but on average.
Once you come to that conclusion,
if you start living that way,
especially not lying to yourself...
Yes, that's the biggest challenge
and the biggest outcome that it can achieve.
Yeah, it has to start by yourself,
because if you say, you know,
I'm really such a good person and so honest
and so generous or I'm so smart
or I'm so productive or whatever,
and if that isn't true,
then reality is going to impinge on you
and undermine your ability to optimize your life.
So it's basically these moral principles, I think,
are objective that will help people optimize lives.
So, yeah, absolutely, I believe it,
that morality should be objective,
but, you know, again, the AI safety community
doesn't seem to even have begun to address that problem.
It's just like money, raising money,
using excuses, it seems like, I don't know,
I totally agree with you.
Obviously, I mean, I've met a lot of people
and they're really, you know, genuine people,
they really genuinely believe there is a huge problem.
I mean, many of them, you know,
that there is a real problem, a real threat,
and they're actually dedicating their lives.
I mean, you know,
not everybody's making a lot of money out of it,
and they really believe that.
I think they're just misguided in so many ways.
Your approach sounds very stoic to me,
your approach to AI,
even when you mentioned earlier that electronics,
you said, well, it's taking a long time,
are you just going to focus on software programming?
It reminded me of I had William Irvin,
who is a stoic writer on the show,
and he said that he had a midlife crisis around 40,
and he was very attracted to Zen,
but then he found stoicism.
It's like, well, with Zen,
you have to practice for years, it might work,
it might not work, stoicism,
you can just focus on it over a weekend
and you get a result.
This is very interesting.
I'm totally down with the stoic AI.
Yeah. Yeah, no.
Yeah, I'm not sure where,
how far it would take the stoicism,
but I mean, I've spent the last 20-plus years,
more like 25 years now,
really pursuing AI and AGI,
and I couldn't imagine what I'd rather be doing.
I mean, it's the most exciting thing in the world.
I'm also, you know, just through my background,
my interest in, you know,
really understanding hardware design
and language design and software design
and having a real interest in psychology
and philosophy,
I'm sort of, I feel that I'm ideally suited
to working on it, you know,
that I really believe that these,
this understanding of philosophy epistemology
in particular, what is knowledge,
how do we know anything,
the importance of concepts
and how do we form concepts, you know,
I mean, concepts, abstract concepts
are the key to human intelligence.
But again, it's understanding intelligence
understanding cognition has to be a prerequisite
for building artificial intelligence.
How would you define intelligence so far
based on what you've gathered and what you have learned?
Yeah, there isn't a concise description.
I mean, I, you know, somewhere in my writings,
I do have a sort of a one or two sentence description,
but it's really a description rather than a definition.
But it's the ability to learn,
learn is important,
learn to solve new problems within,
in real time with constrained resources.
And IQ is a reliable measurement for that?
Not, no, not entirely.
My study of IQ, I was actually involved in
helping to develop a new psychometric test
that doesn't have the same cultural bias
as a lot of existing IQ tests have.
And one of the things I learned from there
that the most important subcomponent of intelligence
that really identifies
which people are able to solve many different problems
that basically are, you know, able,
whether they emotionally are doing it or whatever,
but they're able to solve problems,
is the component of metacognition.
And that's basically conscious or subconscious,
mostly, mainly subconscious ability to know
what a mental approach you need to take
to solve a particular problem.
Because, you know, we have the ability to think logically,
we have the ability to think abstractly,
to use our intuition,
to rely on memory or more or less, and so on.
So metacognition is basically when you come across a problem
that you choose the right tools,
the right mental tools to pursue the problem,
to, you know, yeah,
to basically not go down the road
of trying to solve something methodically, logically,
if the problem is not of a kind that can be solved that way,
you know, that need to be solved more intuitively
and vice versa.
So is it being creative?
That's part of it, but not the main part of it.
I don't think intelligence necessitates creativity.
I think they're somewhat on different mentions.
No, it's basically using the right mental tools for the job.
That is one of the key differences between people
who have high IQ and are, you know, competent,
generally mentally highly competent,
that they tend to use the right methodology
and not get stuck in the wrong methodology.
Considering...
I'm sorry.
Well, just one, kind of one of the insights from studying IQ.
But yeah, IQ is not the, you know,
the only thing that really tells you
whether somebody is intelligent or not,
but it's also quite useful.
Well, just this topic seems to be so controversial
that the moment you started delve a little deep into it,
everybody talk about, well, you can't really talk about,
like, dividing people based on intelligence
on the basis of, let's say, race or culture or country,
because the argument can be made that just look at
whatever culture that we have right now in the world
and how they have evolved to become what they are,
and obviously it must have been a greater intelligence
behind building a city like Tokyo
compared to somewhere else that is not very pleasant,
for example, or productive.
So have you found or come across any kind of a challenge
in the sense that, again, going back to making ethics,
ethical and moral kind of an argument against something
that is incredibly practical and important
to studying intelligence and understanding it?
Yeah, so it's a pity that studying intelligence
and differences of intelligence
has become like third rail or whatever.
You basically, you can't study it, basically,
unless you claim that there are these multiple intelligences
and everybody is equally intelligent
just in a different way.
And I kind of say, well, yeah, there's that person
who's really, he's got a very high rating
in wife-beating intelligence, whatever.
I'm sure you can find something
if you want to make sure that everybody has an IQ
of 140 in something.
No, it's quite ridiculous that you can't really study it.
But it's also, it's not that super important, I think.
There are, there's certainly, I mean,
there's so many flaws in the educational system,
first of all.
There's so many problems with people who are smart
but just emotionally aren't equipped
or don't have the discipline or whatever.
There's so many different components involved.
So ultimately, artificial intelligence or AGI,
of course, in many ways will very rapidly exceed,
I mean, already, of course, narrow AI exceeds human capabilities
in so many ways.
So artificial intelligence, AGI, will, of course,
be so much more powerful in so many ways,
but it will struggle with some of the things
that are easy for us, for humans,
and that's where those are going to be
the hardest problems to solve.
But when you said, I think you also asked me about,
do I have a head resistance?
Absolutely.
I have people claiming, well, there is no such thing as AGI,
artificial general intelligence.
And I actually chose the general particular.
I was particularly happy with calling it AGI,
artificial general intelligence,
actually referring to the little G in cognitive psychology,
in intelligence, because I do believe
that the general learning ability is the key to AGI,
and it's a learning ability,
the ability to learn new things in real time.
And there's a confusion between when people say,
well, surely deep learning is learning.
These are learning systems, and you can't say they don't learn.
Well, there's a huge, huge difference
between collecting a massive amount of data,
tagging the data, number crunching it,
and building a model that gets deployed,
but as a read-only model, essentially.
Don't understand it.
Well, it doesn't understand,
but it also cannot learn interactively.
Right.
So the key to intelligence is it needs to be able to learn
and understand, needs to be able to understand and learn.
I mean, what we do and what an AGI needs to be able to do
is what we do is when we hear or see something,
we make sense of it straight away.
If we see something that doesn't make sense,
we might look around to kind of,
okay, well, what does this mean, you know,
or focus or whatever.
If we hear something that doesn't make sense,
we might ask for clarification or we might think about it.
Hey, what did I just hear?
What does the person mean?
And you might think about it and, oh, okay,
that's what they mean.
So whatever we perceive, we make sense of it
and we integrate that information
so it's available to be used.
Just to show you, just to kind of demonstrate
how pathetically limited, you know,
these current chatbot systems are, you know,
and these are developed by multi-billion dollar companies.
I think Amazon has 10,000 people working on Alexa, you know,
and I mean, that masses amounts of money being thrown at them.
But you take a very simple sentence,
just five or six words,
my sister's cat Spock is pregnant.
You know, any five-year-old child will be able to make sense of it.
You know, I'm speaking, Peter is speaking,
I have a sister, my sister has a cat,
the cat's name is Spock,
you think it's probably male from the name,
you hear it's pregnant, you know, I know it's female.
You know, a five-year-old child will have no problem
integrating that information
and now the next sentence might be she's really big
because she's pregnant,
or next week you might ask have the kittens arrived, you know,
and you can make sense of it.
The current chatbots like, you know, Alexa, Siri or any of them
don't have a hope in hell of even beginning to understand that,
to learn that, something as simple as that.
That's how fundamentally flawed their approach is
by, you know, building the model
and then deploying a read-only model
that cannot learn new facts interactively,
that cannot reason about them,
cannot integrate them into its existing knowledge,
can't ask for clarification if it doesn't understand.
They have none of those cognitive capabilities.
So, you know, that's a dead end.
It's a road to nowhere as far as intelligent systems are concerned.
And these are the cutting-edge models of what is happening in the field.
By the big companies, yeah.
So considering that, what do you think about Elon Musk's Neuralink
and the argument that the only way that we can basically survive
what's coming is by merging with artificial intelligence?
Yeah. So, yeah, that's kind of an interesting approach.
So, first of all, a little bit tongue-in-cheek.
I say, well, you know, we're going to have real AI from machine,
you know, machine AI, hardware-based AI,
way before we ever have intelligence augmentation,
which is basically what they're talking about.
And the knockdown argument is just three letters, FDA.
You know, I mean...
It goes back to government ruining everything.
Yeah. I mean, to have anything like that approved, you know,
will take centuries, you know.
But, you know, that's a bit tongue-in-cheek.
No, I think while there are, you know, obviously important applications
that will be useful for that, that's not a pass to AGI at all
because the bandwidth at which we can receive things
and transmit things is so much lower than, you know, hardware-based AI can.
And messing with our wetware is just incredibly hard and risky.
So, no, that's not the way to AGI.
And so what I do see, though, is that we will have personal assistants
that are so closely coupled, psychologically coupled to us
that they become basically our exocortex.
So it's not that we can enhance our wetware.
I think that's just way too hard,
but that we can extend our minds, our brain, our wetware,
through external devices, but that will be psychologically closely coupled to us.
And the way I see that working out is basically similar to, you know,
people who've been married for a long time or whatever.
You know, they, at a certain point,
they don't really remember or care whose idea something was, you know.
You know, it's sort of, and it's just a psychological coupling.
So in a similar way, if you have your, you know,
we actually call it a personal personal assistant.
We trademark that name because the word personal is so important
for like three different meanings of the word personal.
First of all, personal in that you own it.
So it's owned by you and it serves your purpose,
not some mega corporation's purpose.
Secondly, it's personalized to you.
So, you know, it's not a one size fits all.
It knows your particular goals, your history and so on.
And the third personal is that it's personal in the sense of private,
that you decide what it shares with whom.
So once you have this personal personal assistant
that you interact with all the time, you know, initially think of it,
you know, like a Siri or something, but just much smarter.
And you ask it for advice or ask it to look up something
and it gives you a result.
And, you know, initially it will be,
oh, yeah, my IGO recommended that I buy these stocks
or that, you know, I take this job or, you know,
take this treatment or whatever.
But after a while, as you interact with it,
you won't really even remember or care
whether it was your decision or the AI's decision.
It'll just be part of you.
So I see that way of us extending, of having an extra cortex,
of extending our mental capacity much more feasible
than trying to hack our wetware.
Do you have a time frame for something like that?
I actually believe we have the hardware technology exists in principle.
I think software technology exists in principle.
I think it just needs quite a few people working on it.
I think if there was focused effort to AGI
with the right team and the right architecture,
I think we could have human level intelligence in seven years.
Wow.
Yeah, I don't...
That's amazing.
It's also amazing because Aubrey DeGray was on Joe Rogan
and he said that next huge breakthrough with respect to aging
is coming between five to seven years.
And he said that the change is coming overnight
because the moment that people can say,
hey, we have the possibility of living, I don't know, 200 years,
then the expectation change and then the policy hasn't changed with it
and policymakers are incredibly slow.
So that was his biggest concern.
Do you see the same kind of risk?
Because I see this coronavirus, the way that it exponentially grew.
A very good example about how AI can, for example, spread
and how AI can grow or anything that has anything to do with exponential growth
and how people are unprepared for it because we can't even fathom this exponential growth.
Yeah. Oh, absolutely.
It will happen with AI
because once you get to a certain level where it becomes clear
that this is really something different,
I mean, once you get to a point where right now our AI level where we are
and we typically say if Siri and Alexa have an IQ of 10,
not that IQ is the right measure, but if they had 10, we're at 25 or 30,
still a long way from human level.
Right now, if I let our AI loose on Wikipedia
and I'm not talking about some statistic or big data
which IBM and all of them feed the whole of Wikipedia in,
but there's no understanding of it.
It just picks up certain correlations
and it might be able to answer certain questions,
but it doesn't really understand or integrate what it reads.
Currently, if we let our system loose on Wikipedia,
it might be able to read or understand 10 or 15% of the text that's there
which isn't really enough to bootstrap itself,
but at a point when our system, IGO or some other AI,
can actually read text like that and then ask a human for clarification.
Hey, can you explain this to me? This doesn't make sense to me.
Can you point me in the right direction?
And you can have that kind of self-learning, assisted self-learning
that truly understands and integrates the knowledge that it acquires.
Then things can happen very, very quickly.
And so there's a certain takeoff point, escape velocity or whatever
in terms of acceptance of AI.
And then, of course, funds, unlimited funds will be available
and then everybody will want one, everybody will work on it.
I mean, similar to how everybody jumped on deep learning, machine learning.
I mean, it exploded exponentially over just a few years
and really limitless funds really became available for deep learning, machine learning.
But once the real AI hits that inflection point where people say,
hey, this stuff looks like it's really going to work,
then things can happen very quickly.
So yeah, will people be unprepared for that? Absolutely.
Peter, what is next for you and where can our audience follow your work?
So, well, our website is iGo.ai and we have links to articles and so on.
So we've just launched commercially at the moment.
Our focus is on getting more customers and we're targeting large enterprise companies
that are trying to offer a much better conversational AI experience,
hyper-personalized sort of concierge service.
There are many, many different applications, whether it's your in-car experience,
whether it's a robot in a hospital or hotel,
whether it's a gaming coach that helps you teach you how to be a better gamer,
whether it's for diabetes management,
whether it's for a retail company that wants to offer you a personalized chatbot, basically,
with a brain, chatbot with a brain.
So there are many, many different applications wherever conversational AI is involved.
So that's obviously our big focus now.
We're also trying to raise more money.
As I say, my pockets aren't deep enough to scale the company quickly.
So we're looking for the right kind of investors who really believe in the strategy that we have,
the power of general intelligence and where that's leading.
So that's where we are.
I think there's one thing I haven't mentioned that might be also useful to just talk about briefly,
and that is where does our approach fit in?
Because clearly, just from what I've said, it's not deep learning, it's not machine learning.
DARPA actually have a useful way of looking at it.
They've been presenting what they call the third wave of AI.
So they talk about three waves of AI, and they actually have a fund to fund the third wave of AI.
And what they mean by the three waves of AI is the first wave is basically good old-fashioned AI.
It's all the stuff that was done for decades in AI, mainly logic-based systems, expert systems,
formal logic, flowchart-type approaches, and some statistics and so on.
So that's the first wave.
And then the second wave, of course, hit us like a tsunami about seven, eight years ago.
That's all about deep learning, machine learning.
And of course, there's now a whole generation of people, when you talk about AI,
that's the only thing they actually even know about in AI.
It's machine learning, deep learning, it's big data.
But the third wave that DARPA has identified is basically adaptive systems,
systems that can learn and understand and reason in real time.
And I identify that as what I call a cognitive architecture.
So your architecture inherently has all of the components required for intelligence,
such as real-time learning, reasoning, common sense reasoning, short-term memory,
long-term memory, and the ability to disambiguate and to focus and have goal-directed behavior,
and all of the different essentials of intelligence that your architecture inherently has components for that.
But they also have to be put together in a certain way, but that's sort of a whole other topic.
But that's the third wave of AI is basically a cognitive architecture.
Are there any other individuals, companies, who are approaching it similar to the way that you're seeing it?
There have been cognitive architectures that have been around for quite a while.
Unfortunately, they've now all been cut off basically in the last five, ten years.
I had a brilliant intern from Germany working on our system.
He really understood the cognitive approach and engineering side of it and so on.
He went back to Germany to do his PhD.
He couldn't find a sponsor for cognitive architecture.
So people are saying, well, cognitive architecture, we've been trying them for 30 years.
They haven't worked.
What they don't realize is that 10 years ago, if you said I'm using a neural network to solve this problem,
they say, oh, neural networks, we've tried those for 30 years and they haven't worked.
So things don't work until they do work, you know, sometimes.
So, yeah.
So, no, I don't actually know.
I mean, there's some university projects, a few small projects, one-man shows and so on.
But basically, you can't get funding for it.
You can't get paid.
You can't get any love for this approach.
As far as I know, we're the only company that's actually put 15 years of effort into it.
We've already commercialized our first generation and we've been consistently developing this and commercializing it.
I'm not aware of any other company that actually has a commercial cognitive architecture.
The status quo seems to be a problem.
I was talking to a friend of mine who is a physicist and he was saying at some point all the funding was going to string theory.
If you were doing anything other than string theory, they had no interest in it whatsoever.
It's exactly the same thing.
Yeah, and Aubrey de Grey, of course, has sort of a similar problem, you know.
And, yeah, nanotechnology, of course, also kind of suffers that sort of lack of love, you know,
than when people cottoned onto nanotechnology and how wonderful it was and suddenly it turned into material science.
But if you're trying to do real molecular nanotechnology, you can't get funding for that either.
Man, I should have you back and talk about futurism for another hour, but I know your time is limited.
Before I ask you the last question, we talked about how many other different areas aside from artificial intelligence you've studied.
Who are some of the work and people who have inspired you were coming from the fields other than artificial intelligence?
Well, I moved to America in 1995, 25 years ago.
And when I came here, I was like a kid at a candy store, you know, like a lot of the authors that I've read before.
I could now actually meet them in person and, you know, befriended some of them and met all of these just brilliant people working cutting edge technology.
You know, Eric Drexler was one of one of them in nanotech and then Roy Walford in calorie restriction.
And, you know, he was one of the pioneers in calorie restriction research.
And I read his book, spoke to him and so on, and that, you know, very quickly decided that calorie restriction made a lot of sense.
You know, I want to be healthy and live as long as I can, hopefully long enough for Aubrey and people like that to all our A.I.
to help, you know, solve the problem of aging.
Found that about cryonics research that that made a lot of sense to me.
So I signed up for cryonics, you know, that core.
Yeah. OK. So if all if all else fails, you know, it's a safety net of unknown fabric.
But, you know, it's it's the second worst thing that can happen to you is to end up in the duo.
So, you know, just a lot of exciting things.
And, you know, obviously a lot of people in A.I. that I met.
But, yeah, just super exciting to, you know, to be part of it.
But, you know, this was 25 years ago when I started, you know, just here in California in particular, being exposed to all of this.
Super exciting. But I would never have thought that 20 years later we would have made so little progress in nanotech aging research and and A.I.
mainly for the reason that they haven't had funding.
And also social adaptation keeps coming up that just anything would work as well as a society that adopts it.
Yeah. Well, cryonics that we have, you know, just a few thousand less than two thousand people signed up for seven billion.
It just mind boggles, you know. So, yeah, that that that's quite a shocker.
So, you know, well, we just need to chip away at it and make it happen.
Absolutely. Peter, let me ask you the last question.
I want to ask all my guests that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done?
And what would you say is our greatest achievement?
Well, OK, I haven't thought about that. Well, our greatest achievement, I think, is the parts of where rationality has actually created a better society, has created science.
So the scientific method, I think the the American system.
Well, obviously, it's it's suffering, but, you know, the basically having a lawful society that allows people to pursue their own interests, that protects their individual rights.
So that that kind of civilization that that we've created in the scientific method, I think those are our biggest achievement.
And I think the biggest mistakes, I think, are superstition and religion. I think they've held us back tremendously.
I think they're really very detrimental to mankind.
Thank you.